Somatic VCFs (#141)
stjudecloud/docs: docs/guides/genomics-platform/requesting-data/about-our-data.md

### gVCF files

We provide gVCF files produced by the [Microsoft Genomics Service][msgen]. gVCF files are derived from the BAM files produced above as called by [GATK's haplotype caller][gatk-haplotype-caller]. Today, we defer to [the official specification document][gvcf-spec] from the Broad Institute, as well as [this discussion][gvcf-diff-from-vcf] on the difference between VCF and gVCF files. For more information about how Microsoft Genomics produces gVCF files or any other questions regarding data generation, please refer to [the official Microsoft Genomics whitepaper][msgen-whitepaper].

### Somatic VCF files

> Somatic VCF files available on St. Jude Cloud have been generated when possible for tumor samples where a matching normal sample has also been sequenced. These include samples from the Pediatric Cancer Genome Project (PCGP), Clinical Pilot, and Genomes 4 Kids (G4K) [cohorts][pediatric-cancer-cohorts]. These somatic VCF files contain HG38 coordinate SNV/Indel variant calls generated by the St. Jude somatic variant analysis pipeline outlined below:

Reviewer: Is it "HG38" or "hg38" in general usage? I thought it was typically "hg38".

> 1. Whole genome (WGS) and/or Whole exome (WES) sequencing data were aligned to HG19 using [bwa backtrack][bwa] (`bwa aln` + `bwa sampe`) using default parameters.

Reviewer: Same question for "HG19"

2. Post processing of aligned reads was performed using [Picard][picard] `CleanSam` and `MarkDuplicates`.
3. Variants were called using the [Bambino][bambino-paper] variant caller (you can download Bambino [here][bambino-download]).

> 4. If RNA-Sequencing was performed on a tumor sample, we assess the presence of any called variants in a StrongARM aligned RNA-Seq BAM file.

Reviewer: We should add a citation to Gang's HGG paper that describes the StrongARM method: https://www.nature.com/articles/ng.2938.

Author: I was told we never published the StrongARM method, so good to know we have a link for it. Adding it now.

5. In some Clinical Pilot cases, validation by custom capture was performed, in which case the read counts of that experiment are reported.

> 6. Variants were post-processed using an in-house post-processing pipeline that cleans and annotates variants. This pipeline is not currently publicly available.

Reviewer: We should cite the ClinicalPilot paper as it describes the in-house pipeline: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-06485-7

Author: We do, but do you want it more prominent? After listing the steps, it says `For more detailed information on steps 1-6, see the [Clinical Pilot paper][clinical-pilot] where they are described in depth.`

Reviewer: After I made the comment, I did notice that we referenced the paper below. I do think making it more prominent would be helpful. Maybe even marking each step with an asterisk or something to indicate a footnote that says detailed description in this paper.

Reviewer 2: Also, worth noting that the G4K manuscript is currently in the review process. We'll potentially want to include a reference to this paper when It comes out.

8. Variant filtering:
    * For patient samples where a complete set of variants has been manually curated and previously reported as part of an existing publication, this published set of variants was considered the complete set of variants for that patient tumor sample. This includes samples in the Clinical Pilot cohort study and some PCGP cohort samples.
    * For currently unpublished patient tumor samples, we filtered variants based on metrics derived from the in-house post-processing pipeline and the input of analysts [(see below)](#variant-validation-status). This includes patient tumor samples from the PCGP, G4K, and some Clinical Pilot samples.
9. Variants were converted from our in-house formats to VCF format.
10. Variant coordinates were lifted over to GRCh38_no_alt using [Picard][picard] `LiftoverVcf`.
11. Variants were normalized using [`vt normalize`][vt].
12. Variants were annotated using [VEP v100][vep] and the `--everything` flag.

> 13. VCFs were bgzipped and tabixed, then validated using [VCFtools' `vcf-validator`][vcf-validator].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
13. VCFs were compressed with bgzip and tabix indexed, then validated using [VCFtools' `vcf-validator`][vcf-validator].
```

    * VCFtools' `vcf-validator` is outdated, and is being replaced with [GATK's `ValidateVariants`][gatk-validator] in future versions of the pipeline.

For more detailed information on steps 1-5, see the [Clinical Pilot paper][clinical-pilot] where they are described in depth.

!!! warning
    The variants in these files were not called from the HG38 BAMs available elsewhere on St. Jude Cloud, but are the results of a separate HG19 pipeline.

#### Variant Validation Status

> When variants are assessed by analysts, they make a determination about how confident they are that the variant is correctly called and present only in the tumor sample. This is a wholistic determination using read counts for all sequencing types available, along with computationally derived statistics created by our post-processing pipeline. Potential pathogenicity is not included in this evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When variants are assessed by analysts, they make a determination about how confident they are that the variant is correctly called and present only in the tumor sample. This determination uses read counts for all sequencing types available, along with computationally derived statistics created by our post-processing pipeline. Potential pathogenicity is not included in this evaluation.
```

#### Variant Filtering

> We only consider variants for reporting with "VALID", "LIKELY_VALID", or "PUTATIVE" designations (three highest confidence designations) from the variant validation status assessment. This determination is stored in a patient somatic VCF file under the `validation_status` info tag. Note that variants designated "PUTATIVE" are filtered out if they were not computationally determined to be of high quality according to an in-house metric. Any variants which were not manually reviewed by an analyst (no 'validation_status') require this high quality designation to pass filtering. When variants are not manually reviewed, they receive a `validation_status` of "NA" in the VCF.

Reviewer: I'd like to see a fuller description of what constitutes these three classifications. If I were an external user, based on this description, I'm not sure I'd use these results as I don't have enough information to trust the filtering.

Author: I'm not sure how much more information we can provide. The wiki page is pretty sparse on criteria and conversations with Mike R. weren't much more illuminating. We settled on this filtering criteria after everyone we talked to on the ClinGen side repeated this was the best filtering of the data, but I don't think we ever got the details of the designations filled in.

Reviewer: I don't think we currently have much documentation on the process that yields these designations. I would like to see that change and this is an opportunity to go in that direction. I'm not sure who is best to document the criteria that lead to these designations.

Reviewer 2: I think Scott Foy may be a good source. We all had a long email chain discussion about this once upon a time when deciding exactly what to do. I'll see if I can find and derive some sense from that. My understanding is that it is a mix of hard rules and judgement calls from the analyst...

Somatic VCF files available on St. Jude Cloud have been generated when possible for tumor samples where a matching normal sample has also been sequenced. These include samples from the Pediatric Cancer Genome Project (PCGP), Clinical Pilot, Genomes 4 Kids (G4K), and Real-time Clinical Genomics (RTCG) datasets (https://platform.stjude.cloud/data/cohorts/pediatric-cancer). These somatic VCF files contain HG38 coordinate SNV/Indel variant calls generated by the St. Jude somatic variant analysis pipeline outlined below:

1. WGS and WES reads were aligned to HG19 using [bwa backtrack][bwa] (`bwa aln` + `bwa sampe`) using default parameters.
2. Post processing of aligned reads was performed using [Picard][picard] `CleanSam` and `MarkDuplicates`.
3. Variants were called using the [Bambino][bambino-paper] variant caller (you can download Bambino [here][bambino-download] or by navigating to the [Zhang Lab page][bambino-program] where the  "Bambino package" is listed as a dependency under the CONSERTING section).
4. Variants were post-processed using an in-house post-processing pipeline that cleans and annotates variants. This pipeline is not currently publicly available.

> 5. Depending on cohort, either all variants were manually reviewed by analysts or a subset comprising all coding variants were manually reviewed.

Reviewer 2: Lets be more specific here... and specify which cohort/dataset was treated in which way....

`vt normalize` is used to obtain consistent representations of all variants which may have multiple equivalent forms. If VT modifies a variant, it records the original form in the `OLD_VARIANT` info tag. [Click here][vt] to read about variant normalization.

See the [VEP documentation][vep] for a full description of the annotations applied.

!!! note
    **Variants in these files were curated from analyses across multiple sequencing types including WGS, WES, and RNA Transcriptome.**  

>     For more information on variants for each of the individuals, please refer to the cohort's relevant paper. For more information on the variant calling format (VCF), please see the latest specification for VCF document listed [here][hts-specs].

Reviewer 2: I'm also thinking to edit this paragraph to only make mention of 'For more information on the variant calling format (VCF), please see the latest specification for VCF document listed [here][hts-specs].'

Author: I agree about taking out the part about "the cohort's relevant paper". I think we've made it clear above this that multiple sequencing types were used. I think we just remove this `note` block, and have a standalone paragraph with the VCF specs sentence.

#### Variant Validation Status

When variants are assessed by analysts, they make a determination about how confident they are that the variant is correctly called and present only in the tumor sample. This is a wholistic determination using read counts for all sequencing types available, along with computationally derived statistics created by our post-processing pipeline. Potential pathogenicity is not included in this evaluation.

#### Variant Filtering

We only consider variants for reporting with "VALID", "LIKELY_VALID", or "PUTATIVE" designations (three highest confidence designations) from the variant validation status assessment. This determination is stored in a patient somatic VCF file under the `validation_status` info tag. Note that variants designated "PUTATIVE" are filtered out if they were not computationally determined to be of high quality according to an in-house metric. Any variants which were not manually reviewed by an analyst (no 'validation_status') require this high quality designation to pass filtering. When variants are not manually reviewed, they receive a `validation_status` of "NA".

#### Further notes on patient tumor sample VCF files

> As part of our post-processing pipeline, some variants are annotated with the results of a variety of pathogenicity predictive algorithms. We include those results in the VCFs when they are present. Note that they were performed on the HG19 coordinates. Algorithms include [Likelihood Ratio Test (LRT)][lrt], [MutationAssessor][assessor], [MutationTaster][taster], and [FATHMM][fathmm].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As part of our post-processing pipeline, variants are processed by a variety of in-silico pathogenicity prediction algorithms. We include those results as VCF `FORMAT` tags when applicable. Note that they were performed on the HG19 coordinates. Algorithms include [Likelihood Ratio Test (LRT)][lrt], [MutationAssessor][assessor], [MutationTaster][taster], and [FATHMM][fathmm].
```

Bambino represents indels in a format incompatible with the VCF specification. When we convert variants to VCFs, we store the original Bambino representation in the `bambino_representation` tag of the info field. Note that this entry is always in HG19 coordinates.

> Where possible, read evidence for each variant was determined across each sequencing data type available for the associated patient tumor normal pair. These can include WGS, WES and RNAseq data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Where possible, allele counts for each variant are determined across each sequencing type available for the associated patient tumor-normal pair. These can include WGS, WES and RNA-Seq data.
```

> The newly created HG19 coordinate VCFs are lifted over using [Picard `LiftoverVcf`][picard]. [`hg19ToHg38.over.chain`][chain] is used as the chain file and `GRCh38_no_alt.fa` is used as the reference. [`bcftools annotate`][bcftools] is used to document the reference file and exact liftover command used in the VCF's header. Note that HG19 alleles and coordinates are stored by Picard in the `OriginalAlleles`, `OriginalContig`, and `OriginalStart` info tags within the final VCF file. Please also note that there is a bug in the version of Picard we used (version 2.18.29) which rarely truncates some of the VCF's genotype fields. These are fields which we use to store read counts and depths for each sequencing type (WGS, WES, RNAseq). A [bug report][bug_report] has been filed with Picard. In the current version of the pipeline we recover the dropped entries from the original HG19 VCF. While searching for and correcting these entries, we also reorder the FORMAT and genotype fields to a logical ordering, as opposed to the alphabetical output order of Picard.

Reviewer 3: We need to address that hg38 includes some reference sequences (alt contigs, etc) that our reference does not. How do we handle those sequences, and why is it okay that we use slightly different versions there?

Reviewer 3: For reference, here are the sequences included in the hg38 chain reference and how many associated chains for each:

```
 184 chr1
 102 chr10
  11 chr11
   2 chr11_gl000202_random
  42 chr12
   1 chr13
  80 chr14
  19 chr15
  30 chr16
  28 chr17
   3 chr17_ctg5_hap1
   1 chr17_gl000203_random
   1 chr17_gl000204_random
   3 chr17_gl000205_random
   3 chr17_gl000206_random
   3 chr18
   1 chr18_gl000207_random
  36 chr19
   1 chr19_gl000208_random
  13 chr19_gl000209_random
   1 chr1_gl000191_random
   4 chr1_gl000192_random
 120 chr2
   2 chr20
   2 chr21
   2 chr21_gl000210_random
  20 chr22
  34 chr3
   9 chr4
   2 chr4_ctg9_hap1
   1 chr4_gl000193_random
   1 chr4_gl000194_random
   2 chr5
  17 chr6
   2 chr6_apd_hap1
   2 chr6_cox_hap2
   2 chr6_dbb_hap3
   2 chr6_mann_hap4
   2 chr6_mcf_hap5
   2 chr6_qbl_hap6
   2 chr6_ssto_hap7
  49 chr7
   1 chr7_gl000195_random
  36 chr8
   1 chr8_gl000196_random
   2 chr8_gl000197_random
 135 chr9
   1 chr9_gl000198_random
   1 chr9_gl000199_random
   1 chr9_gl000200_random
   1 chr9_gl000201_random
   1 chrM
   1 chrUn_gl000211
   1 chrUn_gl000212
   1 chrUn_gl000213
   1 chrUn_gl000214
   2 chrUn_gl000215
   1 chrUn_gl000216
   1 chrUn_gl000217
   1 chrUn_gl000218
   1 chrUn_gl000219
   1 chrUn_gl000220
   1 chrUn_gl000221
   3 chrUn_gl000222
   1 chrUn_gl000223
   1 chrUn_gl000224
   1 chrUn_gl000225
   1 chrUn_gl000226
   7 chrUn_gl000227
  16 chrUn_gl000228
   1 chrUn_gl000229
   1 chrUn_gl000230
   1 chrUn_gl000231
   1 chrUn_gl000232
   1 chrUn_gl000233
   1 chrUn_gl000234
   1 chrUn_gl000235
   1 chrUn_gl000236
   1 chrUn_gl000237
   1 chrUn_gl000238
   1 chrUn_gl000239
   1 chrUn_gl000240
   1 chrUn_gl000241
   1 chrUn_gl000242
   1 chrUn_gl000243
   1 chrUn_gl000244
   1 chrUn_gl000245
   1 chrUn_gl000246
   1 chrUn_gl000247
   1 chrUn_gl000248
   1 chrUn_gl000249
 166 chrX
  25 chrY
```

Author: Is it suffice to say that if Picard's look up in the chain is to a contig not present in GRCh38_no_alt, it considers the variant unmappable? We don't do any special handling for those cases, Picard handles it for us.

8. The new VCFs were lifted over to GRCh38_no_alt using [Picard][picard] `LiftoverVcf`.
9. Variants were then normalized using [`vt normalize`][vt].
10. VCFs were annotated using [VEP v100][vep] and the `--everything` flag.
11. Finally, VCFs were bgzipped and tabixed.
12. Before upload, VCFs are validated using [VCFtools' `vcf-validator`][validator].

Coding variants are assessed by analysts who make a determination about how confident they are that the variant is correctly called and present only in the tumor sample. This is a wholistic determination using read counts for all sequencing types available, along with computationally derived statistics created by our post-processing pipeline. We only keep variants with the 3 highest designations, "VALID", "LIKELY_VALID", and "PUTATIVE". This determination is stored in the VCFs under the `validation_status` info tag. Variants which were designated "PUTATIVE" are filtered out if they were not computationally determined to be of high quality according to an in-house metric. Any variants which were not manually reviewed by an analyst require this high quality designation to be included, and have a `validation_status` of `NA`.

> Bambino represents INDELs in a format incompatible with the VCF specification. When we convert variants to VCFs, we store the original Bambino representation in the `bambino_representation` tag of the info field. Note that this entry is always in HG19 coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bambino represents indels in a format incompatible with the VCF specification. When we convert variants to VCFs, we store the original Bambino representation in the `bambino_representation` tag of the info field. Note that this entry is always in HG19 coordinates.
```

2. Post processing of aligned reads was performed using [Picard][picard] `CleanSam` and `MarkDuplicates`.
3. Variants were called using the [Bambino][bambino-paper] variant caller (you can download Bambino [here][bambino-download] or by navigating to the [Zhang Lab page][bambino-program] where the  "Bambino package" is listed as a dependency under the CONSERTING section).
4. Variants were post-processed using an in-house post-processing pipeline that cleans and annotates variants. This pipeline is not currently publicly available.
5. Depending on cohort, either all variants were manually reviewed by analysts or a subset consisting of all coding variants were manually reviewed.
6. Filtering:
      * If a previous publication for a cohort had a published list of variants based on manual curation, that complete list of variants was used for VCF generation. These inlcude the Clinical Pilot and PCGP cohorts.
      * If there was not a canonical list of variants for a cohort, automated filtering based on metrics derived from the in-house post-processing pipeline and the input of analysts was applied. These include the G4K and RTCG cohorts.

> 7. Variants were then converted to VCF format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Variants were then converted to VCF format.This is an example.....BLAH.
```

!!! warning
    Please note, as indicated above, that the somatic variants recorded in these VCF files were called using hg19 aligned WGS/WES/RNA-Seq sequencing data, and not from the hg38 BAMs available elsewhere on St. Jude Cloud.

#### Sample Variant Validation and Filtering

The validation_status field indicates the status of validating the presence and origin (somatic/germline) of the variant using an orthogonal methodology. Note that this doesn't imply anything regarding variant significance, pathogenicity, or relation to disease. Typically, validation is performed either by secondary sequencing using a custom capture panel designed around the called variants (common in research studies) or by cross-validation using simultaneous sequencing by WGS, WES, and/or RNA-Seq (used in clinical genomics).
 

> For validation by a secondary method, "valid" indicates the variant was validated by the secondary method, "putative" indicates that the secondary method could neither confirm nor invalidate the variant (e.g. due to lack of read coverage by the secondary method), and "invalid" indicates a negative result from the secondary method.

Author: I'm still not a fan of the term "secondary method". I think "secondary sequencing" would be just as accurate and a bit more clear
```suggestion
For validation by secondary sequencing, "valid" indicates the variant was validated by secondary sequencing, "putative" indicates that secondary sequencing could neither confirm nor invalidate the variant (e.g. due to lack of read coverage by the secondary sequencing), and "invalid" indicates a negative result from the secondary sequencing.
```

Reviewer: I think there is an important distinction here. For our purposes, we are in fact using additional sequencing as a validation method, but it could be done through other means as well. So I think when talking about the general process of validation, we should call it a "method". Then in places where we describe our method, we can clarify that it is sequencing.
